Let's discuss Ant versus Maven.
A lot of people think that Ant and Maven are meant
to compete against each other, and really,
they could be used in conjunction with one another,
but they're trying to solve two different problems.
Ant was developed originally to be a replacement for a build
tool called Make that wasn't cross platform.
Make was designed to work on one platform,
and we've tried to adapt it to other platforms over the years.
Ant was built on top of Java and using XML,
both tools that were meant to be used cross platform.
So regardless of whether you're on a Windows machine,
Mac, Linux, or some other environment,
you can build things and have them be able to transfer
from one environment to another.
Make was built around a UNIX environment and was somewhat brittle,
ran into problems like white space and hidden characters, it was
very powerful was used for a lot of years,
in fact, it's still used today a little bit.
It's very brittle in nature and not very cross platform
compliant. As mentioned earlier, Ant is built on top of Java and
is XML based, but it's very procedural.
You have a hard time inheriting anything, you have to go
out of your way to use different pieces,
and it's a stretch to be able to use composition or things like
that inside of your Ant scripts. With Ant,
you have to explicitly code everything.
You have to call out what your targets are,
what goal we're going to do next if we're going to chain
goals. I've got a little code snippet here what an Ant
target is just for doing a clean.
It's very clear that we're calling clean, we even have a description of
what it is, and there is a comment thrown in there,
and we're going to clearly delete this directory, that's our build directory,
by the way. You can see that the build directory is a variable that we're
passing in and it's going to get evaluated at runtime, but notice we have to
define everything the way we want to do it.
This actually can lead us to some problems.
What if we like the word clean and you like the word clear, and somebody
else wants the phrase clean up for this target? It can be left to any
number of variations and it's not a standard.
You have to go into every file and know that this is what
you need to call to perform a clean.
This is what you're going to call for clear or clean up. Init is another
one that we've seen people use from time to time as to what they would like
to have their clean up procedure run as word delete or dissed and delete
distribution and that type of stuff.
So Ant leads us to a lot of variations that can be problematic.
There is also a lot of tribal or organizational
knowledge that gets built into Ant,
not specifically because you can rename variables or certain things,
but because everybody does it a little bit different.
There is not a standard out there for what things are called, each
organization ends up having a large repository of these scripts that are
unique to them, nothing will carry over from one job to another,
or necessarily even to one project to another.
If you go to share this with another project too,
you have to go in and copy and paste all of these
files to be able to reuse them.
There is not a lot of reuse, there is not really the notion of inheritance,
and there is no structure, nothing like that with Ant. Maven is more
than a scripting tool, it's a full‑featured build tool.
We're going to dive more into that throughout the rest of the training,
but you get a lot of implicit functionality built into Maven. Maven's
clean is Maven's clean, it doesn't matter if we're deleting the target
directory, generated sources, whatever we're doing,
whatever we're going to clean up inside of this application,
it's always going to be called the goal clean.
You get a lot of consistency across projects that way. You're also able to
achieve inheritance in your projects by using parent palms or an inherited
palm through composition, those types of things.
You also get transitive dependencies. In some of the
other slides that we've covered so far,
we've mentioned that if you use Maven for one reason at all,
it should be for transitive dependencies,
meaning that if you need to pull down a jar,
it's going to pull in all the jars that it needs to
work with in your application.
Now you can do this using Ant and Ivy, the add‑on for Ant that tries to do
dependency management, but every project that is a major project using Ivy
has since migrated to a pure Maven approach.
Another key point worth mentioning is that Maven is
built around a versioning system.
What is meant by that is that handles things, calling something at a snapshot
inside of a Maven project actually has some context behind it.
We've got a whole section coming up on versioning.
Let's not dive into that too much right now,
but it's one of the key goals that Maven had in mind when it was designed.
Let's rather talk about some of the pros and cons a little bit closer and
actually show you some of the things that maybe aren't so great about
Maven or that it has a steeper learning curve.
Pros and cons of Maven versus Ant, Maven could be a bit of a black box,
meaning that you don't necessarily see where all of the stuff is
defined at, it has a little steeper learning curve and you've got
the convention over configuration, meaning that if you follow Maven's convention,
it works really well.
But if you try to step outside of their boundaries,
things really start to crumble quite a bit.
There is considerably better IDE integration with Maven more so than Ant. In
Ant, you call targets from the IDE and Maven has a much better,
much richer integration.
There is also a lot less overhead through the use of repos now.
Traditionally,
Ant would require us to download all of these files multiple times. With Maven,
we typically use a local or corporate repository so you don't have to download
the same file 20 times because you have 20 projects using it.
One last pro is that it also is somewhat of a con is that Maven is a different
mindset of a problem that occurs and people trying to make Maven act like Ant,
one is a scripting tool and one is a build tool.
Biggest complaint you'll see is, well, I can do this with Ant,
but I can't do this with Maven.
You need to quit making Maven try to act like Ant.
Let's cover some actual pros for Ant. Ant is really clear and very
straightforward, you know exactly what you're doing,
and you can easily trace through your files.
You can see every step through the targets that you explicitly call,
and it's a lot quicker to learn,
but it's also very copy and paste intensive. If you forget to change a
variable or something inherited that you weren't expecting to get in an
inherited file, problems occur. And finally,
you have a larger project size using source control using Ant over
Maven. You're going to copy those files and store them in Git
Subversion or some other source code control tool like Bitbucket, and
that's just the nature of what Ant does.
Let's look at a basic Ant build file now. Let's walk through an Ant build file.
You can see that we've got a clean, compile, and jar target and it's a pretty
straightforward build file. The clean obviously deletes our directory.
Compile makes our directory first to make sure that it didn't exist and
executes a javac task that compiles the code and the specified source
directory into the destination directory.
And lastly,
we've got a jar target that gathers up everything in the build/classes directory
and packages it up into a named jar file of HelloWorld.jar.
Without looking at this, this looks like a complete Ant build file.
There is actually a lot of problems with this file.
I could call jar first because we haven't set up the previous goals that this
one depends on and my compiler clean may have not ran yet.
We can actually get an erroneous jar that doesn't contain the
information I want to build for this application.
This is actually a very brittle build file and can enable me to skip
steps while running my application or building it.
It's not really a good contract about what we're
trying to do with our application, but as you can see,
it's pretty clearly laid out of what we're intending to do.
If we follow the steps, it can achieve our build.
This is where we're talking about tribal knowledge that comes into play,
and what we mean by that is that we have to call our Ant
clean, Ant compile, and Ant jar specifically in that order
for our application to work.
Now that's a little bit of a false sense of security because we
shouldn't have to know anything if our Build tool is doing what it's
supposed to be doing, at least at that level.
Let's look at a Maven POM file instead.
Now the Maven POM file can do all of those goals that we just
ran in the Ant file on this same application.
We can clean,
compile. and package the jar and it will all work because it knows
looking at our code just from this Maven POM file.
This is what we're talking about that it can be kind of a black box.
You don't see all the setup declaration, if you follow their conventions,
their naming conventions, their directory structures,
this type of information, this application will just run.
So it's a little bit non‑descriptive at first until you
understand the semantics of how Maven works.
This is clearly a lot simpler, but it could also be more confusing at first.
The convention over configuration is what we will discuss
throughout the rest of this course. Let's now look at some of Maven's installation best practices.